.. currentmodule:: moderndid

=============================
ModernDiD 0.1.1 Release Notes
=============================

ModernDiD 0.1.1 is a maintenance release with dependency updates, minor
refactoring, and documentation improvements.

Python versions 3.11-3.13 are supported in this release.


Improvements
============

Dependency and Import Cleanup
-----------------------------

* Update scipy dependency range and add GPU feature support in ``pixi.toml``.

  (`#207 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/207>`__)

* Handle intercept and covariates formula more carefully in estimators.

  (`#207 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/207>`__)

* Update Dask and Spark backend imports and remove unused exports.

  (`#207 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/207>`__)

* Reorganize package dependencies.

  (`#207 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/207>`__)

* Remove unused parameter from API surface.

  (`#204 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/204>`__)


Documentation
=============

* Update usage documentation with improved examples and clarity.

  (`#212 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/212>`__)

* Add acknowledgements section and enhance contributing guidelines.

  (`#211 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/211>`__)

* Simplify plotting examples and update image URLs in README.

  (`#208 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/208>`__)

* Enhance GPU troubleshooting section and clarify dependency documentation.

  (`#205 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/205>`__)

* Update installation and overview documentation.

  (`#205 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/205>`__)

* Add pixi setup instructions to README.

  (`#209 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/209>`__)


Contributors
============

A total of 1 person contributed to this release.

* Jordan Deklerk


Pull Requests Merged
====================

A total of 8 pull requests were merged for this release.

* `#212 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/212>`__: Update usage docs
* `#211 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/211>`__: Enhance documentation
* `#210 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/210>`__: Fix prose and links in README
* `#209 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/209>`__: Simplify plotting examples
* `#208 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/208>`__: Introduce pixi dev tools
* `#207 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/207>`__: Remove unused imports and exports from Dask and Spark backends
* `#205 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/205>`__: Update installation and overview docs
* `#204 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/204>`__: Remove unused parameter
