.. currentmodule:: moderndid

=============================
ModernDiD 0.2.0 Release Notes
=============================

**ModernDiD** 0.2.0 introduces new features including publication-quality table
generation, result extraction for estimators, GPU acceleration for continuous
DiD, heterogeneous treatment effects with Bell-McCaffrey inference, and
important bug fixes.

Python versions 3.11-3.13 are supported in this release.


New Features
============

Publication Tables via ``maketables``
-------------------------------------

* Add ``maketables`` plug-in interface to all estimator result objects for
  generating publication-quality LaTeX and text tables directly from results.

  (`#225 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/225>`__)

Result Extraction
-----------------

* Expose result extraction for all estimators, providing programmatic access
  to estimation outputs.

  (`#228 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/228>`__)

GPU Acceleration for ``cont_did()``
------------------------------------

* Add CuPy GPU acceleration for continuous treatment DiD estimators, including
  device array handling, B-spline GPU tests, NPIV validation tests, and
  benchmarks.

  (`#216 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/216>`__)

Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
-------------------------------

* Add new parameters for heterogeneous treatment effects and Bell-McCaffrey
  small-sample inference for ``did_multiplegt()``.

  (`#222 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/222>`__)


Enhancements
============

* Align Wald pre-test, confidence bands, and bootstrap quantiles for
  consistent inference across estimators.

  (`#241 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/241>`__)

* Add error handling for NA values in input data.

  (`#240 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/240>`__)


Bug Fixes
=========

* Fix clustered standard errors not propagating through ``att_gt()``.

  (`#224 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/224>`__)

* Fix docs build failure.

  (`#230 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/230>`__)


Refactoring
===========

* Update result objects for core estimators with a unified interface.

  (`#229 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/229>`__)

* Unify synthetic data function names with ``gen_`` prefix and add deprecated
  wrappers for old names.

  (`#218 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/218>`__)

* Reorganize backend CuPy functionality.

  (`#221 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/221>`__)


Infrastructure
==============

* Update test workflows to support multiple OS environments (Ubuntu, macOS,
  Windows).

  (`#239 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/239>`__)

* Update installation to not include Spark by default.

  (`#237 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/237>`__)

* Conditionally ignore validation tests on Windows.

  (`#242 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/242>`__)


Documentation
=============

* Update GPU guide, installation guide, README examples, user guide, and
  plotting guide.

  (`#238 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/238>`__,
  `#236 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/236>`__,
  `#235 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/235>`__,
  `#232 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/232>`__,
  `#231 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/231>`__,
  `#227 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/227>`__,
  `#226 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/226>`__)

* Enhance new estimator guide and architecture documentation.

  (`#236 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/236>`__)

* Enhance development documentation and CI setup.

  (`#223 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/223>`__)


Contributors
============

A total of 1 person contributed to this release.

* Jordan Deklerk


Pull Requests Merged
====================

A total of 27 pull requests were merged for this release.

* `#242 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/242>`__: CI: conditionally ignore validation tests on Windows
* `#241 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/241>`__: ENH: align Wald pre-test, confidence bands, and bootstrap quantiles
* `#240 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/240>`__: ENH: Add error handling for NA values
* `#239 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/239>`__: CI: update test workflows to support multiple OS environments
* `#238 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/238>`__: DOC: update GPU guide
* `#237 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/237>`__: MAINT: update installation to not include spark by default
* `#236 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/236>`__: DOC: enhance new estimator guide and architecture docs
* `#235 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/235>`__: DOC: update installation guide link
* `#234 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/234>`__: Update pre-commit hook astral-sh/ruff-pre-commit to v0.15.5
* `#233 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/233>`__: Update github/codeql-action action to v4.32.6
* `#232 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/232>`__: DOC: update README example to match Callaway Sant'Anna example
* `#231 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/231>`__: DOC: update user guide and README
* `#230 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/230>`__: BUG: fix docs failing
* `#229 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/229>`__: REF: update result objects for core estimators
* `#228 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/228>`__: FEAT: expose result extraction for estimators
* `#227 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/227>`__: DOC: reorganize plotting guide
* `#226 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/226>`__: DOC: update README to include publication tables feature
* `#225 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/225>`__: FEAT: add maketables plug-in interface for publication-quality tables
* `#224 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/224>`__: BUG: fix clustered standard errors not propagating through att_gt()
* `#223 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/223>`__: DEV: enhance development documentation and CI
* `#222 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/222>`__: FEAT: add more treatment effects and Bell-McCaffrey inference for did_multiplegt()
* `#221 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/221>`__: MAINT: reorganize backend CuPY functionality
* `#220 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/220>`__: Update actions/download-artifact action to v8
* `#219 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/219>`__: Update pre-commit hook astral-sh/ruff-pre-commit to v0.15.4
* `#218 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/218>`__: REF: unify synthetic data function names
* `#217 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/217>`__: REF: update installation guide and add dev directory
* `#216 <https://github.com/jordandeklerk/moderndid/pull/216>`__: FEAT: add GPU acceleration for cont_did()
